---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.19.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Bash
  language: bash
  name: bash
---

# Contributing Guide

As noted in the README, this guide is [MyST Markdown], with cells you can run interactively using the bash kernel when the [Jupytext] extension is available.

[MyST Markdown]: https://mystmd.org/
[Jupytext]: https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/

## Setup

Create a "workspace" environment and point the "python3" kernelspec at the new environment.
Note that [scripts/README](scripts/README.md) includes similar setup instructions for the purpose of reproducing results only, which does not require modifying any kernelspec.
The new environment and the kernelspec modification may or may not persist between JupyterLab servers, depending on the platform and options below.

The first step is to create a Conda environment from `conda-lock.yml`, a requirements file with explicit versions that does not trigger dependency resolution.

```{code-cell}
conda-lock install --name workspace conda-lock.yml
```

The second step is to make the environment accessible from Jupyter, which can be tricky on a hosted JupyterHub.
One way is to overwrite an existing (and therefore visible) kernelspec, which does trigger a spurious `WARNING` that the "kernelspec may not be found".
The other way is to add a `--user` kernelspec.
We also adjust the kernel's `PYTHONPATH` environment variable to allow `import core` to find the `scripts` folder.

```{code-cell}
conda run --name workspace \
  python -m ipykernel install --prefix="$CONDA_PREFIX" --env PYTHONPATH "$PWD/scripts"
```

OR

```{code-cell}
conda run --name workspace \
  python -m ipykernel install --user --env PYTHONPATH "$PWD/scripts"
```

### Develop in Notebooks

The code repository does not store Jupyter notebooks (extension ".ipynb").
Instead, we store Python scripts (extension ".py") that the [Jupytext] extension keeps automatically synced with notebooks.
Those scripts are what we run "operationally" (i.e. to reprocess files and perform benchmarking).
While developing, however, we prefer to use Jupyter notebooks.

To initialize the Jupyter notebooks after a cloning this repo, or when pulling a new script, run the cell below to sync manually.
When working in JupyterLab, Jupytext performs synchronization on save and on opening a paired notebook.

[Jupytext]: https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/

```{code-cell}
jupytext --sync scripts/*.py
```

## Dependencies

The project dependencies are listed in `environment.yml` following the specifications for Conda environment definition.
We need a Conda environment to get the `h5repack` and `nccopy` command line utilities that come with `hdf5` and `libnetcdf`.

[Conda]: https://docs.conda.io/

## Reproducible Environment Configuration

A fully specified Conda environment can be created from the `conda-lock.yml` file generated by [conda-lock].
After adding a new dependency to `environment.yml`, you must regenerate the `conda-lock.yml` file as follows.

[conda-lock]: https://conda.github.io/conda-lock/

```{code-cell}
conda-lock lock --file environment.yml
```
